---
layout: post
title: "Life, Death, and Artificial Intelligence"

---

I’ve thought a lot about why I want to study artificial intelligence (AI). Looking back on my experiences in high school, it makes sense that I would wind up pursuing computer science (CS); I’ve always loved mathematics and computers, and experiences with various classes and clubs introduced me to the power and beauty of software engineering. But why am I drawn to AI rather than other subfields of CS like distributed systems or programming language design?

Terror management theory suggests that a fear of death is at the core of our beliefs and behavior, both individually and collectively as a species. For many people, the finiteness of life is subconsciously repressed, but for me, it’s something I think about often. Ever since the sudden death of my mom in 2016, I’ve been painfully aware that life is short and can end without warning. To say that that experience devastated me would be an understatement. In the following year, my health suffered, my grades took a hit, and I struggled to find purpose. The track I was on, to graduate and work as a software engineer, no longer seemed so appealing, and while my peers earned internships at top tech companies, I took time off to relax with family and introspect.

In spite of the short-term devastation, I was eventually able to extract value from the experience. As I rethought my career trajectory, I decided I needed to work on problems with more philosophical implications than normal software engineering. I began to consider deeply what it means to be human and started taking classes on cognitive science and philosophy. I discovered the field of artificial intelligence, and the holy grail of artificial general intelligence struck me as a problem worth pursuing. At the time, I couldn’t articulate why, but thinking about it now after several years, I believe there are a few core reasons.

To begin with, research in AI is a multidisciplinary endeavor. Developments in AI draw from a variety of fields in both the natural and social sciences: fields like neuroscience, cognitive science and psychology provide inspiration for technical developments while fields like sociology and ethics inform ideas regarding how AI might affect society and how it should or shouldn’t be applied. But also, developments in AI influence a variety of fields: AI-powered technologies are helping to enable scientific pursuits like drug discovery and tumor diagnosis as well as humanitarian efforts in social justice and climate change. Working in AI will therefore allow me to continually draw on perspectives from a variety of different fields while simultaneously influencing the scientific community at large.

Second, while my ability to effect change directly is limited by time and space, AI systems are not limited in the same way. Technologies like Amazon Alexa and Tesla AutoPilot are able to help millions of people concurrently, and the lifespan of these systems is not limited like that of humans. By working on AI systems, I’m able to extend my influence to locations in space and time which would otherwise be impossible. Technologies I build will have the potential to help people ever after I’m gone.

And finally, I’m fascinated by the deep philosophical questions that come with engineering advanced AI systems. What are the roles of embodiment and emotions in intelligence, and are they necessary for human-level AI? What is consciousness, and can it be engineered? Is human-level AI achievable, and what is intelligence to begin with? The field is only starting to grapple with these questions, and it’s unlikely that we will have answers anytime soon, but every year that goes by, experts in the field learn a little more and dig a little deeper, and as I mature as a scientist and engineer, I hope to contribute to the discussions.

Ultimately, I believe that studying, researching, and engineering AI will give me the opportunity to maximize my impact on the world. For a long time, I was concerned about my ability to positively affect the trajectory of science and technology given my limited time on Earth. But since deciding to focus on AI, I am no longer worried. I am now confident that my work can and will make a difference.
